[MUSIC PLAYING]
>> The human heart has
always been seen as the seat
of consciousness and connection.
Now a groundbreaking new
study has definitively
shown that our hearts are in
communication with one another
through our connection with
the Earth's magnetic field.
This is "Gaia News."
The HeartMath Institute is
a world-renowned research
organization whose
goal is to help people
to reconnect to their hearts.
At the core of their
work is the understanding
that our emotions affect
the physiological activity
in our bodies.
And by self-regulating,
we can be
the drivers of that activity.
When we can get the heart to
work together with the brain,
we can enter into a state
of coherence or alignment
that dramatically benefits our
mental and physical health.
Dr. Rollin McCraty is
the director of research
at the HeartMath Institute.
He has been spearheading
the investigation
into the different kinds
of coherent states.
>> We talk a lot about
coherence here at HeartMath.
And there's three different
buckets of coherence--
personal coherence,
and that has to do
with the harmony and the
harmonious interaction
of our body's internal systems
and our heart and brain.
Social coherence
would be the second.
That has to do with the
coherence of a group.
The harmonious relationships,
are we getting along
with each other?
How do we clear those
histories and separations?
And then the third is we
call global coherence.
Now global coherence
is where we're
studying the synchronization
and the interconnections,
the interconnectivity, between
humanity and the earth itself.
>> It's this global
coherence that the HeartMath
Institute's latest study focused
on as part of their Global
Coherence Initiative.
The Institute has developed the
world's only global monitoring
system that is
constantly tracking
the rhythms and frequencies
in the earth's magnetic field.
Their study comes out
of the understanding
that there is a
tangible connection
between the earth's magnetic
field and our hearts
and brains.
>> The frequency, when we
measure them here on Earth,
is a frequency called 0.1 Hz.
Now the reason this
is important is
that's exactly the same
frequency as our heart rhythms
when we're in a coherent state.
Now the other magnetic
system that's also important
here are called
Schumann resonances.
These are magnetic
waves that are traveling
around the earth
that are trapped
between the surface of
the earth and the bottom
of the ionosphere.
And if they're the
right frequency
to fit the geometry
of that cavity,
they become what
are called globally
propagating standing waves.
That just means they're
everywhere all the time.
So in other words,
the takeaway here
is we have the basic physics
to understand how our hearts
and brains are
continually synchronizing
with and transferring
energy and information back
and forth between the
fields of the earth.
So it's like a giant
biofeedback system.
>> An earlier study by the
Institute sought to examine
just how this works.
A group of people wore
heart rate variability
monitors for five months.
Heart rate variability
is a measurement
of the coherence in
our nervous system.
Researchers found that when
the frequencies of the earth
were more stable,
the participants'
hearts synchronized with the
earth and they felt better.
In a follow-up
study, researchers
were surprised by
additional findings.
>> The big surprise came when we
synchronized the data from this
group of people who were spread
across the state of California.
But what we discovered was
that their heart rhythms
were actually synchronized.
Because they were in sync
with the resonant frequencies
of Earth, it showed a
level of interconnectivity
with humans that we
just did not expect
to ever see, let alone predict.
>> This led the Institute to
conduct a much larger study
to try to verify the remarkable
findings on a global level.
>> All the participants in these
groups around the world did
what's called a heart lock in,
which is basically a heart kind
of focused meditation.
What we found was
that almost every--
of all of these
over 100 people--
became more synchronized
with the earth
over the next 24 hours.
More and more
studies are showing
that this is a really
good thing for us
to be in sync, to be in harmony,
with the energetic systems
of the earth.
>> Every time our hearts
beat, we radiate a measurable
magnetic field into
the environment.
Given that, the implications
of this study are major.
>> There's several
takeaways from this work.
One is that when
we're more loving,
we're actually really
broadcasting or radiating love,
not only does it have a lot
of health effects for us,
but it's actually creating a
heart-to-heart synchronization
with others.
So when we're in sync,
not only within ourselves
and become more in sync with the
earth and the magnetic fields
of the earth, these are
actually energy sources for us.
In other words, we
don't just draw energy
from the food we
eat, we actually
get it from the
energetic environment.
>> Dr. McCraty hopes that
these latest findings can serve
as a call to action for us all.
>> Being more motivated to
pause throughout the day and ask
yourself, what am I
actually feeding the field?
Am I feeding the field feelings
of frustration, anxiety,
impatience?
Because what we feed
the field matters.
Or am I feeding the field
love, kindness, compassion?
And if enough of us,
especially together,
feed the field with more
love and compassion,
that's putting a stronger,
more coherent signal
into the whole earth's
field environment.
That helps others wake up.
It helps them make a shift.
>> The HeartMath Institute is
now forging ahead with a number
of follow-up studies to dive
even deeper into the profound
interconnectivity of
humans and the earth.
For a new perspective,
this is "Gaia News."
[MUSIC PLAYING]